add deepagents RAG tutorial (#4653)
langchain-ai/docs: src/oss/deepagents/rag.mdx

import RagDeepSplitDocumentsPy from '/snippets/code-samples/rag-deep-split-documents-py.mdx';
import RagDeepSplitDocumentsJs from '/snippets/code-samples/rag-deep-split-documents-js.mdx';
import RagDeepStoreDocumentsPy from '/snippets/code-samples/rag-deep-store-documents-py.mdx';
import RagDeepStoreDocumentsJs from '/snippets/code-samples/rag-deep-store-documents-js.mdx';
import RagDeepBaselinePy from '/snippets/code-samples/rag-deep-baseline-py.mdx';
import VectorstoreTabsPy from '/snippets/vectorstore-tabs-py.mdx';
import VectorstoreTabsJS from '/snippets/vectorstore-tabs-js.mdx';
import RagDeepBaselineJs from '/snippets/code-samples/rag-deep-baseline-js.mdx';
import RagDeepSearchToolPy from '/snippets/code-samples/rag-deep-search-tool-py.mdx';
import RagDeepSearchToolJs from '/snippets/code-samples/rag-deep-search-tool-js.mdx';
import RagDeepAgentPy from '/snippets/code-samples/rag-deep-agent-py.mdx';
import RagDeepAgentJs from '/snippets/code-samples/rag-deep-agent-js.mdx';
import RagDeepRunPy from '/snippets/code-samples/rag-deep-run-py.mdx';
import RagDeepRunJs from '/snippets/code-samples/rag-deep-run-js.mdx';

> One of the most powerful LLM-based applications are sophisticated question-answering (Q&A) chatbots which augment LLMs by providing it with structured access to a set of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the most powerful LLM-based applications are sophisticated question-answering (Q&A) chatbots which augment LLMs by providing it with inference-time access to a set of data.
```
?

not sure what's structured about it.

Author: I think I was trying to get at it being a query-retrieval system based on a vector store rather than the agent going off and pulling the info from the internet itself... Will think about this

This might be private data, recent data, or data that is not part of the training data the LLM is trained on.
These applications use a technique known as Retrieval Augmented Generation, or [RAG](/oss/langchain/retrieval/).

> This guide shows how to build a Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) application with [Deep Agents](/oss/deepagents). You index [docs.langchain.com](https://docs.langchain.com), retrieve relevant chunks at query time, offload them to the agent [filesystem](/oss/deepagents/backends), and delegate analysis to [subagents](/oss/deepagents/subagents) so the orchestrator context stays clean.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide shows how to build a Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) application with [Deep Agents](/oss/deepagents). You index (a subset of) [docs.langchain.com](https://docs.langchain.com), retrieve relevant chunks at query time, offload them to the agent [filesystem](/oss/deepagents/backends), and delegate analysis to [subagents](/oss/deepagents/subagents) so the orchestrator context stays clean.
```
?

> This guide shows how to build a Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) application with [Deep Agents](/oss/deepagents). You index [docs.langchain.com](https://docs.langchain.com), retrieve relevant chunks at query time, offload them to the agent [filesystem](/oss/deepagents/backends), and delegate analysis to [subagents](/oss/deepagents/subagents) so the orchestrator context stays clean.

Reviewer: (important) IMO:

- we should not delete the existing rag tutorial, which covers minimal rag agents
- we should refine the messaging here to explain why / when you'd want to do more than the minimal agents, and how we can use deepagents specifically.

this reads like it answers "Here is how you do RAG with deepagents", but to me it's more accurately "Here is how you can parallelize research over retrieved documents (using deepagents)" or similar. There are other things you can do with deepagents that can be useful for RAG (e.g., use skills).

## Why retrieval matters

A language model on its own does not have access to your documentation. Ask it about a specific API that changed recently, and it answers from training data: often plausible, sometimes wrong, and never grounded in your source of truth.

> You can pass some of the documentation into the prompt, but, aside from token usage, you are then limited by the context window.

Reviewer: I think the issue here is that fetching the relevant documentation is itself a non-trivial task that you'd want your application to handle. RAG won't get around token usage or finite context windows (perhaps I misunderstood the point here).

The rest of this tutorial builds an agent that indexes LangChain documentation, retrieves evidence with a vector search tool, analyzes each chunk in parallel subagents, and answers the **same question** in [Run the agent](#run-the-agent) with citations to the docs.

### What you will build

1. **Index**: Load the LangChain documentation into a vector store.
2. **Search**: Build a custom tool that runs vector similarity search and writes each retrieved chunk to the agent filesystem.
3. **Analyze**: Delegate file analysis to a subagent that reads the file and returns a focused summary.
4. **Synthesize**: Use the main agent to get the final answer from subagent reports.

## Prerequisites

API keys for:

- A chat model provider (Anthropic, OpenAI, or Google)
- OpenAI (or another [embeddings integration](/oss/integrations/embeddings)) for indexing

## Setup

:::python
<Steps>
<Step title="Create project directory">

```bash
mkdir docs-rag-agent
cd docs-rag-agent
```

</Step>
<Step title="Install dependencies">

<CodeGroup>
```bash pip wrap

> pip install deepagents langchain langchain-openai langchain-text-splitters requests numpy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pip install deepagents "langchain[openai]" langchain-text-splitters requests numpy
```

```

```bash uv wrap
uv init
uv add deepagents langchain langchain-openai langchain-text-splitters requests numpy
uv sync
```
</CodeGroup>

</Step>
<Step title="Set API keys">

```bash
export OPENAI_API_KEY="your_openai_api_key"
export ANTHROPIC_API_KEY="your_anthropic_api_key"   # If using Claude

> export GOOGLE_API_KEY="your_google_api_key"         # If using Gemini

Reviewer: should we feature GLM 5.2 or another open source model?
```python
from langchain.chat_models import init_chat_model

model = init_chat_model("fireworks:fireworks/glm-5p2")
```
(arguably out of scope for this PR as we're still featuring gemini everywhere)

Author: made a ticket to address this separately

</Step>
<Step title="Set up LangSmith" id="set-up-langsmith">

RAG applications run retrieval and generation in sequence. When you run the examples in this tutorial, [LangSmith](/langsmith/observability) logs a trace for each query so you can inspect retrieval, tool calls, and model responses.
After you [sign up for LangSmith](https://smith.langchain.com), set your environment variables to start logging traces:

```shell
export LANGSMITH_TRACING="true"
export LANGSMITH_API_KEY="..."
```

<Tip>
If you are building a production agent, we also recommend you set up [LangSmith Engine](/langsmith/engine) which monitors your traces, detects issues, and proposes fixes.
</Tip>

</Step>
</Steps>
:::

## Index LangChain documentation

In the indexing step, you'll take the source content and convert _chunks_ of it into numerical representations. This numerical representation captures the semantic meaning of the chunk. Storing a mapping of these numerical representations and the document chunks in a `VectorStore` allows you to efficiently retrieve relevant content when a user sends a query based on its own numerical representation.

> Indexing commonly works in four steps:

Reviewer: should we cross-link to /oss/python/langchain/knowledge-base anywhere? or indicate that this is similar content?

Author: that might also go, haven't reviewed it yet fully but I can add a note to this at the end

<RagDeepPrintDocumentsPreviewPy />

```text
Total characters: 589579
> ## Documentation Index
> Fetch the complete documentation index at: https://docs.langchain.com/llms.txt
> Use this file to discover all available pages before exploring further.

# Build a RAG agent with LangChain
```
:::
:::js
Use `fetch` to retrieve markdown from `https://docs.langchain.com/{path}.md` for each path in `DOC_PATHS`.

<RagDeepLoadDocumentsJs />

If you run this code it prints:

```text
Loaded 14 documentation pages.
```

You can also review the page content itself:

<RagDeepPrintDocumentsPreviewJs />

```text
Total characters: 553117
> ## Documentation Index
> Fetch the complete documentation index at: https://docs.langchain.com/llms.txt
> Use this file to discover all available pages before exploring further.

# Build a RAG agent with LangChain

One of the most powerful LLM-based applications are sophisticated question-answering (Q\&A) chatbots which augment LLMs by providing it with structured access to a set of data.
This might be private data, recent data, or data that is not part of the training data the LLM is trained
```
:::

### Split documents

> The loaded documentation is long, which makes it too large to fit into the context window of many models.

Reviewer: 100 - 150k tokens total!

> Even for those models that could fit the full corpus in their context window, models can struggle to find information in very long inputs.

Reviewer: plus just token efficiency

</Tip>

This completes the **Indexing** portion of the tutorial. You now have a queryable vector store containing chunked LangChain documentation.

The next step is to build a Deep Agent that searches this index at run time, offloads retrieved chunks to the filesystem, and delegates analysis to subagents. See [Build the agent](#build-the-agent). To think of it in RAG terms:

1. **Retrieve**: Given a user input, relevant splits are retrieved from storage using a [Retriever](/oss/integrations/retrievers).
2. **Generate**: A [model](/oss/langchain/models) produces an answer using a prompt that includes both the question and the retrieved data.

![retrieval_diagram](/images/rag_retrieval_generation.png)

## Build the agent

:::python
Add this code to `agent.py`:
:::

:::js
Add this code to `agent.ts`:
:::

<Steps>
<Step title="Add the search tool">

The `search_documentation` tool runs similarity search against the indexed corpus, then writes each retrieved chunk to the agent filesystem under `/retrieved/{batch_id}/`. It returns file paths so the orchestrator can delegate analysis without loading full chunk text into its context.

> The tool uses @[`Command`] to update the `files` state key. Deep Agents reads those paths through built-in filesystem tools such as `read_file` and `grep`.

Reviewer: this assumes we're using state backend. ideally we access the backend in the tool and `backend.upload_files`. @sydney-runkle for specifics on doing that (can we inject in runtime, put in module scope here, or something else?)

## Synthesis

- Wait for all chunk-analyst results before writing the final answer.
- Merge overlapping facts and deduplicate source URLs.
- Prefer concrete steps and code-oriented guidance from the documentation.`;
```
:::

</Step>
<Step title="Create the agent">

:::python
Add model initialization and agent creation to `agent.py`:

<RagDeepAgentPy />
:::

:::js
Add model initialization and agent creation to `agent.ts`:

<RagDeepAgentJs />
:::

The main agent keeps the `search_documentation` tool. The `chunk-analyst` subagent uses built-in filesystem tools to read chunk files but does not search the vector store directly.

</Step>
</Steps>

## Run the agent

Run the RAG agent with the example query:

:::python
<RagDeepRunPy />
:::

:::js
```bash
npx tsx agent.ts
```

<RagDeepRunJs />
:::

When the agent runs, it:

1. Calls `search_documentation` with a query about subagent streaming.
2. Receives file paths such as `/retrieved/a1b2c3d4/chunk_1.md`.
3. Launches one or more `task()` calls to `chunk-analyst`, each scoped to a single chunk file.
4. Synthesizes a final answer with links to the relevant documentation pages.

> If you enabled LangSmith in [Setup](#setup), open [LangSmith](https://smith.langchain.com) and inspect the trace to see search calls, filesystem writes, subagent delegations, and the final response.

Reviewer: would be nice to see / walk through an example trace here.

Author: working on it, don't know where to put that trace right now so I can share it.

## Security considerations

<Warning>
RAG applications are susceptible to **indirect prompt injection**. Retrieved documentation may contain text that resembles instructions. Because retrieved chunks share the context window with your system prompt, models may follow instructions embedded in documentation rather than your intended prompt.
</Warning>

To mitigate this:

1. **Use defensive prompts**: Instruct the orchestrator and subagents to treat retrieved content as data only, as shown in the prompts above.

> 2. **Wrap context with delimiters**: The search tool stores chunks with a `# Source:` header so analysts can distinguish metadata from body content.

Reviewer: I'm not sure we should bill these as mitigations (these provide no guarantees). Validate responses by checking source material is fine though.

One of the most powerful LLM-based applications are sophisticated question-answering (Q&A) chatbots which augment LLMs by providing it with inference-time access to a set of data.
This might be private data, recent data, or data that is not part of the training data the LLM is trained on.
These applications use a technique known as Retrieval Augmented Generation, or [RAG](/oss/langchain/retrieval/).

[Deep Agents](/oss/deepagents/overview) gives you primitives for RAG: custom retrieval tools, a [filesystem backend](/oss/deepagents/backends), [subagents](/oss/deepagents/subagents), [skills](/oss/deepagents/skills), and [grading rubrics](/oss/deepagents/rubric). You can combine them in different ways depending on your corpus size, latency requirements, and how strictly answers must be grounded in source data.

This guide introduces several RAG patterns and walks through one end-to-end example: a documentation Q&A agent that indexes a subset of [docs.langchain.com](https://docs.langchain.com), retrieves relevant chunks at query time, offloads them to the filesystem, and delegates analysis to subagents so the orchestrator context stays clean.

## RAG patterns

> When you build RAG with Deep Agents, you orchestrate retrieval, analysis, and synthesis in several ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deep Agents allows you to orchestrate retrieval, analysis, and synthesis in several ways:
```
maybe a nit but would clarify that these are possibilities (as opposed to something all use of deep agents leads to)

> How do I stream intermediate tool results from a subagent?

Pass that question to a [Deep Agent](/oss/deepagents/overview) with no custom tools and no access to the documentation corpus, to see what the model comes up with:

:::python
<RagDeepBaselinePy />
:::

:::js
<RagDeepBaselineJs />
:::

Without retrieval, the agent cannot look up current LangChain documentation. Responses tend to be generic, may omit guidance such as [subagent streaming](/oss/deepagents/frontend/subagent-streaming), or include outdated information.

The example in this tutorial indexes LangChain documentation, retrieves evidence with a vector search tool, analyzes each chunk in parallel subagents, and answers a question with citations to the docs.

### What you will build

1. **Index**: Load the LangChain documentation into a vector store.
2. **Search**: Build a custom tool that runs vector similarity search and writes each retrieved chunk to the agent filesystem.
3. **Analyze**: Delegate file analysis to a subagent that reads the file and returns a focused summary.
4. **Synthesize**: Use the main agent to get the final answer from subagent reports.

## Prerequisites

API keys for:

> - A chat model provider (Anthropic, OpenAI, or Google)

Reviewer: Why limit to these 3, vs. referring to https://docs.langchain.com/oss/python/integrations/chat (which includes options for open models as well)

<RagDeepLoadDocumentsJs />

If you run this code it prints:

```text
Loaded 14 documentation pages.
```

You can also review the page content itself:

<RagDeepPrintDocumentsPreviewJs />

```text
Total characters: 553117
> ## Documentation Index
> Fetch the complete documentation index at: https://docs.langchain.com/llms.txt
> Use this file to discover all available pages before exploring further.

# Build a RAG agent with LangChain

One of the most powerful LLM-based applications are sophisticated question-answering (Q\&A) chatbots which augment LLMs by providing it with structured access to a set of data.
This might be private data, recent data, or data that is not part of the training data the LLM is trained
```
:::

### Split documents

The loaded documentation is long with over 100k tokens total, which makes it too large to fit into the context window of many models.
Even for those models that could fit the full corpus in their context window, models can struggle to find information in very long inputs. Using the context window for large amounts of content is also nottoken efficient.

> For ease of use, split the @[`Document`] objects into chunks. These chunks will be used for embedding and vector storage in the next steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For ease of use, split the @[`Document`] objects into chunks (`Document` objects with less material). These chunks will be used for embedding and vector storage in the next steps.
```
